PROJECT NOTES

“The users table stores authentication and identity details. Passwords are never stored in plain text; only hashed values are saved for security.”


“After reinstalling MySQL Server, the database was recreated using the CREATE DATABASE command, followed by selecting it with USE before defining tables.”


“The subjects table stores syllabus subjects and avoids duplication using a unique constraint.”


“The topics table uses a foreign key to establish a one-to-many relationship between subjects and topics, ensuring referential integrity.”


“The notes table stores AI-generated academic notes and uses multiple foreign keys to maintain relationships with users, subjects, and topics, ensuring structured and reusable learning content.”


“The chat_history table stores AI-based academic interactions and maintains a relationship with users and subjects to enable revision and context-aware learning.”


“The database schema follows normalization principles and uses foreign keys to maintain relationships between users, academic content, AI-generated notes, chat history, and resume feedback.”


“The backend is developed using Flask, runs inside a Python virtual environment, and dependencies are managed using a requirements.txt file.”


“The Flask backend connects to MySQL using a reusable connection helper, and database connectivity was verified using a test API endpoint.”


“Flask applications must explicitly call app.run() to start the development server.”


“User authentication is implemented using bcrypt for password hashing and JWT for stateless authorization.”


“I implemented secure authentication using bcrypt for password hashing and JWT for stateless authorization. Protected routes validate the token and extract user identity.”


“JWT access tokens have a limited lifetime and can expire. If a token expires, the user must re-authenticate using the login endpoint to obtain a new token before accessing protected routes.”


“All protected API routes require a valid JWT passed in the Authorization header using the Bearer scheme.”


“The backend enforces strict foreign key constraints, ensuring that notes cannot be created unless the referenced subject and topic records already exist in the database.”


“Foreign key constraint errors helped validate the correctness of the database schema and ensured referential integrity between subjects, topics, and notes.”


“Before inserting dependent records such as notes, prerequisite master data (subjects and topics) must be inserted into their respective tables.”


“Database-level constraints act as a safety mechanism that prevents invalid or inconsistent academic data from being stored.”


“Multiple active MySQL connections can cause lock wait timeout errors; resolving them may require inspecting active processes and terminating idle sessions.”


“The backend APIs were tested using PowerShell Invoke-RestMethod, simulating real client-server interactions without a frontend.”


“Successful note creation and retrieval confirmed end-to-end integration between authentication, authorization, database relationships, and REST APIs.”


🔹 What you’ve implemented

	Normalized database design

	JWT-secured academic APIs

	Scalable subject–topic–note hierarchy

🔹 Why this matters

	Prevents duplicate data

	Enables AI topic-wise generation

	Matches real LMS systems


“Prompt engineering ensures academic-focused AI output.”


If examiner asks:

	“Why did you place it there?”

You answer confidently 👇

	“Routes are grouped by responsibility. Notes CRUD comes first, 	then AI-enhanced note generation, then metadata like subjects 	and topics. This keeps the backend modular and scalable.”


"AI Quota Handling"

	EduGenie integrates OpenAI for content generation.
	To ensure uninterrupted academic usage, a fallback mechanism is 	implemented.
	If the AI service is unavailable due to quota or rate limits, 	the system automatically provides structured academic notes.
	This ensures reliability, cost control, and continuous 	availability.


“Our system supports AI-based note generation.
In case the AI service is unavailable due to quota limits,
a fallback academic content generator ensures continuity.”


• AI content generation is handled via OpenAI API
• JWT-secured endpoint ensures authorized access
• Database-backed subject–topic validation
• Graceful fallback mechanism implemented
• Prevents system failure due to API quota limits
• Ensures uninterrupted academic usage


AI Fault Tolerance Strategy

	• EduGenie implements a fallback mechanism for AI generation:
	• If OpenAI API responds successfully → return AI-generated 		  content
	• If API fails due to quota or error → return structured 	• predefined content
	• Prevents backend crashes
	• Ensures uninterrupted user experience
	• Makes system demo-safe and production-resilient


“During frontend-backend integration, Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS) errors occurred because React (port 5174) and Flask (port 5000) run on different origins.
This was resolved using Flask-CORS to explicitly allow cross-origin requests.”


“Initially, BrowserRouter was declared in both main.jsx and App.jsx, causing nested router conflicts. The issue was resolved by keeping BrowserRouter only in main.jsx and removing it from App.jsx, ensuring proper React routing architecture.”


“Axios was integrated as a centralized API service layer to simplify HTTP communication and automatically attach JWT tokens using interceptors.”


“JWT identity must be a serializable data type. The user ID was converted to string during token creation and cast back to integer when extracted, preventing serialization errors.”


“The JWT secret key length was increased to meet SHA-256 security recommendations (minimum 32 bytes), eliminating insecure key length warnings.”


“OpenAI rate limit errors (HTTP 429) were handled gracefully using a try–except block and fallback content generation, preventing backend crashes.”


“Foreign key constraint violations during note creation validated the correctness of relational schema design.”


“Axios interceptors were implemented to automatically attach JWT tokens to all protected API requests, ensuring secure and centralized authentication handling.”


“Axios interceptors were implemented to automatically attach JWT tokens to all protected API requests, ensuring secure and centralized authentication handling.”


JWT Protected Routes cannot be accessed directly in browser.
Authorization header must be included.
"Missing Authorization Header" means route is working correctly.


Phase: Backend API Validation via PowerShell
Verified:
- JWT authentication
- Protected route access
- Subject data retrieval
- Token-based authorization


Day Progress Insight

We successfully implemented:

	JWT authentication flow end-to-end
	Axios interceptor for automatic token injection
	Backend–Frontend integration
	Error handling for duplicate resources
	Route configuration without nested routers

Major debugging lessons:

	Never wrap <BrowserRouter> twice
	Always export what you import
	CORS must be enabled for frontend-backend communication
	Protected routes require Authorization header
	Backend must be restarted after route changes


"Vite starter CSS conflicts with Tailwind layout system. Remove default flex body styling before enabling Tailwind."


🔹 Navbar Component Created
	Created reusable Navbar.jsx
	Added Project Title (click → Dashboard)
	Added Logout button (removes token)
	Used Navbar in all main pages
	Makes UI consistent

🔹 Dashboard Navigation Fix
	Fixed wrong routing for AI Note & Quiz
	Earlier both opened /subjects
	Created separate routes:
		/subjects
		/notes
		/generate-note
		/generate-quiz
	Each card now has proper navigation

🔹 Tailwind CSS Integrated
	Installed Tailwind
	Updated index.css with:
		@tailwind base
		@tailwind components
		@tailwind utilities
	Removed default Vite CSS (it was breaking layout)
	UI now modern & responsive

🔹 Subjects Page Bug Fix
	"Add Subject" option was missing
	Cause: newSubject state not defined
	Added:
		useState for newSubject
		handleAddSubject() function
	Refetch subjects after adding

🔹 Axios Interceptor Added
	Created centralized API file
	Automatically attaches JWT token
	No need to manually add Authorization header

🔹 JWT Security Verified
	Direct access to /subjects without token → blocked
	Backend protected using @jwt_required()

🔹 UI Improvements
	Gradient background
	Card hover animation
	Clean subject list UI
	Consistent navigation bar


Every time you open backend:
	cd backend
	venv\Scripts\activate
	python app.py
Make this your muscle memory.

Open new terminal for frontend:
	cd frontend
	npm run dev

Website link - http://localhost:5173/


“AI Quiz generation endpoint was successfully integrated with the frontend. The issue where quiz content was not displaying was caused by incorrect response handling. The fix involved properly extracting response.data.quiz from the backend instead of using placeholder test content.”


“The frontend initially failed to trigger the quiz API because the API function was not properly imported. This was resolved by creating and exporting a dedicated generateQuiz() function inside the centralized API service layer.”


“The frontend initially failed to trigger the quiz API because the API function was not properly imported. This was resolved by creating and exporting a dedicated generateQuiz() function inside the centralized API service layer.”


“Duplicate navigation bars appeared due to Navbar being declared both inside Dashboard and inside the global Layout component. The issue was fixed by keeping Navbar only inside Layout to maintain consistent UI structure across protected routes.”


“Protected routes were unintentionally redirecting users to the login page due to missing token validation logic. This was resolved by ensuring the JWT token is stored in localStorage and automatically attached to all requests via Axios interceptors.”


If they ask:
How did you ensure users cannot delete other users’ data?

You say:
I enforced ownership validation at the SQL layer by including both quiz ID and user ID in the DELETE condition, preventing unauthorized access even if someone manipulates API parameters.


If asked:
How did you handle deletion in React?

You say:
I created a dedicated delete handler that calls a protected DELETE endpoint. After successful deletion, I refreshed the state by refetching quizzes to maintain UI consistency.


When converting a TEXT column to JSON in MySQL, existing data must be valid JSON format. Otherwise, the schema migration fails. During development, old invalid data was deleted before modifying the column type.


If examiner asks:
“Is this system scalable?”

You answer:
“Yes sir, the system supports structured academic learning through predefined syllabus subjects and also supports dynamic AI-based topic generation for new domains.”


🔹 AI Quiz JSON Refactor

“Quiz content storage was upgraded from plain TEXT format to structured JSON format in the database. This enables proper rendering of quiz questions as an array instead of raw string output.”

“Backend AI quiz generation was modified to return structured JSON containing subject, topic, and questions array instead of plain text.”

“This architectural change improved frontend rendering flexibility and allowed proper formatting of multiple-choice questions.”


🔹 Database Schema Migration Insight

“When converting the quizzes.content column from TEXT to JSON, existing invalid records prevented schema modification. Old data was cleared to ensure successful migration.”

“Database schema migrations require validation of existing records to prevent data integrity conflicts.”


🔹 React Rendering Bug Fix

“React application crashed due to attempting to render an object directly. The issue was resolved by properly extracting and joining quiz.questions array before rendering.”

“React components must only render primitive values (string, number) or mapped arrays — not raw objects.”


🔹 Quiz Deletion Security Validation

“Quiz deletion is secured using user ownership validation at the SQL layer (DELETE WHERE id AND user_id). This prevents unauthorized deletion even if API parameters are manipulated.”


🔹 Hybrid AI Architecture Design Decision

“EduGenie now follows a Hybrid Academic AI Architecture:

Structured MCA syllabus mode (predefined subjects & topics)

Custom AI mode (dynamic AI-generated topics based on user input)”

“This ensures the system supports both curriculum-based learning and dynamic domain expansion.”


🔹 Custom AI Topic Generation

“A new AI endpoint was implemented to dynamically generate academic topics based on user-provided subject name.”

“The frontend was updated to support Custom AI Mode with dynamic topic suggestion rendering.”

“Suggested topics are displayed as a selectable list to enable further quiz generation (integration pending).”


🔹 Debugging Lessons (Very Important for Viva)

“400 Bad Request errors were traced to mismatched API payload structures between frontend and backend.”

“Frontend must send subject_id and topic_id in structured mode, while custom mode requires a different payload structure.”

“Always inspect Network tab before debugging backend.”


🔹 Architectural Maturity Point (Important for Examiner)

“If examiner asks: Why Hybrid?”

You answer:
“The hybrid model balances structured academic reliability with AI-driven flexibility. It ensures curriculum alignment for MCA students while allowing expansion into emerging domains without database dependency.”


“The system dynamically generates topic structures for any subject if none exist, making it adaptive and scalable.”


“EduGenie is not just an AI chatbot. It is a structured academic ecosystem for MCA students that integrates syllabus-based content management, AI-powered note generation, adaptive quiz systems, and performance analytics.”


“EduGenie follows the official MCA syllabus structure. Subjects are system-defined to maintain academic integrity and prevent random content generation.”


🎓 New System Architecture (Academic Structure)

We redesign your data hierarchy like this:

MCA
 ├── Semester 1
 │     ├── Subject
 │     │     ├── Topics
 │     │     │     ├── Notes
 │     │     │     ├── Quizzes
 │
 ├── Semester 2
 │     ├── Subject
 │
 ├── Semester 3
 ├── Semester 4


Now it becomes syllabus-driven.

“The platform is structured semester-wise to align with university academic flow.”


"EduGenie is not just an AI chatbot. It is a structured academic support system aligned with the official MCA curriculum, including semester-wise core, practical, and elective subject categorization."


"I designed a structured academic data model supporting core, practical, and grouped elective subjects semester-wise with normalized relational mapping."


"Unlike general AI tools, EduGenie integrates official MCA syllabus structure into the academic flow, ensuring syllabus-aligned preparation."


“It is deployed on cloud. Frontend on Vercel, backend on Render, database on Railway, and AI powered by Llama model via API.”


“Frontend is deployed on Netlify, backend on Render, and database is hosted on cloud MySQL. JWT authentication is used for security.”


🔹 Semester-Wise Academic Database Structuring Phase

“EduGenie database was restructured to strictly follow the official MCA semester-wise syllabus model.”

The hierarchy now follows:

MCA → Semester → Subject → Unit → Topic → Notes → Quizzes

Each subject is structured as:

• 5 Units per Subject
• 6 Topics per Unit
• Enforced via foreign key constraints
• Verified using SQL aggregation queries

🔹 Large-Scale Database Cleanup & Normalization

“During development, generic placeholder units (e.g., Introduction, Core Concepts) were replaced with syllabus-aligned academic units.”

To ensure structural consistency:

• Old placeholder units were deleted
• Units with zero topics were identified using GROUP BY and HAVING
• Orphan topics and orphan units were detected using LEFT JOIN validation queries
• Referential integrity was validated using foreign key constraints

Master validation queries ensured:

• Every subject has exactly 5 units
• Every unit has exactly 6 topics
• No orphan topics
• No orphan units
• No duplicate structural entries

This resulted in a fully normalized academic relational schema.

🔹 Referential Integrity & Structural Validation

“Database-level validation was performed using aggregate SQL queries to ensure academic structural correctness.”

Validation checks included:

• Subject → Unit count validation
• Unit → Topic count validation
• Detection of zero-topic units
• Detection of foreign key orphan records

This ensures that:

• No incomplete syllabus data exists
• AI note generation always maps to valid academic topics
• Quiz generation cannot occur for invalid or missing units

🔹 Debugging Insight: MySQL DELETE with GROUP BY

“While deleting empty units, MySQL syntax limitations required the use of a nested subquery to avoid modifying and selecting from the same table.”

This improved understanding of:

• MySQL execution restrictions
• Safe deletion strategies
• Subquery-based cleanup methods


“What is unique in your project?”

It not only generates AI notes and quizzes, but also tracks individual student progress and provides personalized performance analytics.


If examiner asks:
	How do you handle structured vs custom quiz?

You now confidently answer:
	Structured mode resolves subject/topic from DB.
	Custom mode bypasses DB resolution.
	Both share common AI generation pipeline.
	DB stores structured quizzes with IDs.
	Custom quizzes stored with NULL references.
	Retrieval uses LEFT JOIN to handle both.
	That answer alone shows system understanding.



